Add RSS section to native memory management section (#31061)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/native-reference.adoc

This section will apply the information in that article to show how to use `perf` and
https://github.com/iovisor/bcc[bcc/eBPF]
to understand what causes Quarkus native executables to consume memory on startup.

[[rss-perf]]
==== Perf

`perf` works in older Linux systems, whereas eBPF requires a newer Linux kernel.
The overhead of `perf` is higher than eBPF,
but it can understand stack traces generated with DWARF debug symbols, which eBPF can't.

In the context of GraalVM,
DWARF stack traces contain more detail and are easier to understand than those generated with frame pointers.
As first step, build a Quarkus native executable with debug info enabled and a couple of extra flags.
One flag to disable optimizations,
and another to avoid inlined methods being omitted from the stack traces.
These two flags have been added to obtain stack traces that contain as much information as possible.

[source,bash]
----
$ mvn package -DskipTests -Dnative \
  -Dquarkus.native.debug.enabled \
  -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=-O0,-H:-OmitInlinedMethodDebugLineInfo
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
Disabling optimizations will definitely impact the runtime performance of the native executable,

> but changing these characteristics are not important for this particular exercise.

Author: I'll provide a better explanation.

I had a quick check on the impact of -O0 on used methods/classes/packages and it seems to have tiny difference but not much:

With `-O0`:
```
wc -l no-opts.reports/used_*
    6937 no-opts.reports/used_classes_code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner_20230213_103633.txt
   45005 no-opts.reports/used_methods_code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner_20230213_103633.txt
     419 no-opts.reports/used_packages_code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner_20230213_103633.txt
   52361 total
```

Without `-O0`:
```
wc -l with-opts.reports/used_*
    6933 with-opts.reports/used_classes_code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner_20230213_103912.txt
   44986 with-opts.reports/used_methods_code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner_20230213_103912.txt
     418 with-opts.reports/used_packages_code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner_20230213_103912.txt
   52337 total
```

> but changing these characteristics are not important for this particular exercise.

Author: Reworded section.

====

Let's measure how much RSS a Quarkus native executable takes on startup on this particular environment:

[source,bash]
----
$ ps -o pid,rss,command -p $(pidof code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner)
      PID   RSS COMMAND
     1915 35472 ./target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner -Xmx128m
----

How come this Quarkus native executable consumes ~35MB RSS on startup?
To get an understanding of this number, this section will use `perf` to trace calls to `syscalls:sys_enter_mmap`.
This system call is particularly interesting for GraalVM based native applications because of how it allocates heap.

> This is allocated using either aligned or unaligned heap chunks.

Author: This == heap

> This is allocated using either aligned or unaligned heap chunks.

Author: I've applied this, see new content.

All non-array objects get allocated in thread local aligned chunks.
Each of these are 1MB in size by default.
For arrays, if they are bigger than 1/8 of the aligned chunk size,
they will be allocated in unaligned heap chunks which have a size dependant on the object itself.
The very first time a thread allocates an object or small array,
it will request an aligned heap chunk that it will use exclusively until it has run out of space in that chunk,

> in which case it will request another aligned heap chunk.

Author: Done.

====

Once the startup completes, stop the process and generate the stacks:

[source,bash]
----
$ perf script > out.stacks
----

As a final step, generate a
https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph[flamegraph]
with the generated stacks:

[source,bash]
----
$ export FG_HOME=...
$ ${FG_HOME}/stackcollapse-perf.pl < out.stacks | ${FG_HOME}/flamegraph.pl \
    --color=mem --title="mmap Flame Graph" --countname="calls" > out.svg
----

The flamegraph should look something close to this:

image::mmap.svg[mmap flamegraph]

There are several things of interest to notice there:

* The stack traces that contain method calls to `com.oracle.svm.core.genscavenge.ThreadLocalAllocation` are related to aligned or unaligned heap chunk allocations explained above.
  As explained above,
  for the majority of allocations these chunks will be 1MB by default,
  so they're interesting because each allocated chunk has a considerable effect on the RSS consumption.
* Of the thread allocation stacks,
  the ones under `start_thread` are particularly revealing.
  The machine on which this test was run has 32 cores,
  and the default Vert.x/Netty behaviour is to create as many threads as cores.

>   In this stack trace you can observe 2x36 calls to `mmap` system call.

Author: Good question. Looking at the number of threads is actually lower, it's 18:

```
$ ps -e -T | grep -c $(pidof code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner)
18
```

Something has changed that I'm unaware, looking...

Also, it would seem those stacktraces are doubled, it would seem each thread might call twice? 2x2x18. I will investigate why this would be the case.

>   In this stack trace you can observe 2x36 calls to `mmap` system call.

Author: To be more precise, Vert.x/Netty used to create as many as event loop threads as cores, but now in a machine of 32 cores it creates 10 event loop threads. Amongst the other 8 threads there are 2 Vert.x/Netty IO threads:

```
$ ps -e -T | grep $(pidof code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner)
   2320    2320 pts/0    00:00:00 code-with-quark
   2320    2321 pts/0    00:00:00 ference Handler
   2320    2322 pts/0    00:00:00 gnal Dispatcher
   2320    2324 pts/0    00:00:00 ecutor-thread-0
   2320    2325 pts/0    00:00:00 -thread-checker
   2320    2326 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-0
   2320    2327 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-1
   2320    2328 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-2
   2320    2329 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-3
   2320    2330 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-4
   2320    2331 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-5
   2320    2332 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-6
   2320    2333 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-7
   2320    2334 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-8
   2320    2335 pts/0    00:00:00 ntloop-thread-9
   2320    2336 pts/0    00:00:00 tloop-thread-10
   2320    2337 pts/0    00:00:00 tloop-thread-11
   2320    2338 pts/0    00:00:00 ceptor-thread-0
```

>   In this stack trace you can observe 2x36 calls to `mmap` system call.

Author: Quarkus code has evolved to be more ergonomic, so it also takes memory available to decide how many event loop threads to start. On my system with Xmx128m it'll create 12 event loop threads.

>   In this stack trace you can observe 2x36 calls to `mmap` system call.

Author: Going back to the maths. I'll rewrite the section in a bit with my findings. This is what is happening:

When you pass -Xmx128m, it trims down the number of event loop threads to 12. Aside from that there are 6 other threads, so 18 threads in total. Now, all of those threads have their name truncated to 16 chars (not 15). Technically, each of those should result in 1 mmap call reserve and 1 mmap commit, making a total of 36 but you see a total of 72. I think what's happening is this:

When you record `syscalls:sys_enter_mmap`, it tracks calls to `__GI___mmap64` and looking at this with `gdb`, you can see that each `mmap` call results in two calls to `__GI___mmap64`. It seems there's some delegation happening:

```
Thread 2 "code-with-quark" hit Breakpoint 1, __GI___mmap64 (offset=0, fd=-1, flags=16418, prot=0, len=2097152, addr=0x0) at ../sysdeps/unix/sysv/linux/mmap64.c:58
58	  return (void *) MMAP_CALL (mmap, addr, len, prot, flags, fd, offset);
(gdb) bt
#0  __GI___mmap64 (offset=0, fd=-1, flags=16418, prot=0, len=2097152, addr=0x0) at ../sysdeps/unix/sysv/linux/mmap64.c:58
#1  __GI___mmap64 (addr=0x0, len=2097152, prot=0, flags=16418, fd=-1, offset=0) at ../sysdeps/unix/sysv/linux/mmap64.c:46
#2  0x00000000004f4033 in com.oracle.svm.core.posix.headers.Mman$NoTransitions::mmap (__0=<optimized out>, __1=<optimized out>, __2=<optimized out>, __3=<optimized out>, __4=<optimized out>, __5=<optimized out>)
#3  0x00000000004f194e in com.oracle.svm.core.posix.PosixVirtualMemoryProvider::reserve (this=0x7ffff7691220, nbytes=0x100000, alignment=0x100000, executable=false) at com/oracle/svm/core/posix/PosixVirtualMemoryProvider.java:126
#4  0x00000000004ef3b3 in com.oracle.svm.core.os.AbstractCommittedMemoryProvider::allocate (this=0x7ffff7658cb0, size=0x100000, alignment=0x100000, executable=false) at com/oracle/svm/core/os/AbstractCommittedMemoryProvider.java:124
#5  0x0000000000482f40 in com.oracle.svm.core.os.AbstractCommittedMemoryProvider::allocateAlignedChunk (this=0x7ffff7658cb0, nbytes=0x100000, alignment=0x100000) at com/oracle/svm/core/os/AbstractCommittedMemoryProvider.java:107
#6  com.oracle.svm.core.genscavenge.HeapChunkProvider::produceAlignedChunk (this=0x7ffff7444398) at com/oracle/svm/core/genscavenge/HeapChunkProvider.java:112
#7  0x0000000000489485 in com.oracle.svm.core.genscavenge.ThreadLocalAllocation::slowPathNewArrayLikeObject0 (hub=0x7ffff6ff6110, length=15, size=0x20, podReferenceMap=0x7ffff6700000) at com/oracle/svm/core/genscavenge/ThreadLocalAllocation.java:306
#8  0x0000000000489165 in com.oracle.svm.core.genscavenge.ThreadLocalAllocation::slowPathNewArrayLikeObject (objectHeader=0x8f6110 <io.smallrye.common.expression.ExpressionNode::toString+160>, length=15, podReferenceMap=0x7ffff6700000) at com/oracle/svm/core/genscavenge/ThreadLocalAllocation.java:279
#9  0x0000000000489066 in com.oracle.svm.core.genscavenge.ThreadLocalAllocation::slowPathNewArray (objectHeader=0x8f6110 <io.smallrye.common.expression.ExpressionNode::toString+160>, length=15) at com/oracle/svm/core/genscavenge/ThreadLocalAllocation.java:242
#10 0x0000000000d202a1 in java.util.Arrays::copyOfRange (original=0x7ffff6a33410, from=2, to=17) at java/util/Arrays.java:3819
#11 0x0000000000acf8e6 in java.lang.StringLatin1::newString (val=0x7ffff6a33410, index=2, len=15) at java/lang/StringLatin1.java:769
#12 0x0000000000acac59 in java.lang.String::substring (this=0x7ffff6dc0d48, beginIndex=2, endIndex=17) at java/lang/String.java:2712
#13 0x0000000000acaba2 in java.lang.String::substring (this=0x7ffff6dc0d48, beginIndex=2) at java/lang/String.java:2680
#14 0x00000000004f96cd in com.oracle.svm.core.posix.thread.PosixPlatformThreads::setNativeName (this=0x7ffff7658d10, thread=0x7ffff723fb30, name=0x7ffff6dc0d48) at com/oracle/svm/core/posix/thread/PosixPlatformThreads.java:163
#15 0x00000000004f9285 in com.oracle.svm.core.posix.thread.PosixPlatformThreads::beforeThreadRun (this=0x7ffff7658d10, thread=0x7ffff723fb30) at com/oracle/svm/core/posix/thread/PosixPlatformThreads.java:212
#16 0x00000000005237a2 in com.oracle.svm.core.thread.PlatformThreads::threadStartRoutine (threadHandle=0x1) at com/oracle/svm/core/thread/PlatformThreads.java:760
#17 0x00000000004f9627 in com.oracle.svm.core.posix.thread.PosixPlatformThreads::pthreadStartRoutine (data=0x2a06e20) at com/oracle/svm/core/posix/thread/PosixPlatformThreads.java:203
#18 0x0000000000462ab0 in com.oracle.svm.core.code.IsolateEnterStub::PosixPlatformThreads_pthreadStartRoutine_38d96cbc1a188a6051c29be1299afe681d67942e (__0=<optimized out>) at com/oracle/svm/core/code/IsolateEnterStub.java:1
#19 0x00007ffff7e4714d in start_thread (arg=<optimized out>) at pthread_create.c:442
#20 0x00007ffff7ec8950 in clone3 () at ../sysdeps/unix/sysv/linux/x86_64/clone3.S:81
```

The `mmap64.c` source code for my env can be found [here](https://gist.github.com/galderz/9c178691918a5442e36ec45ae0fb0319#file-gistfile2-txt-L58).

>   In this stack trace you can observe 2x36 calls to `mmap` system call.

Author: Section reworked and pushed.

inlining optimizations might obscure the type of array allocation chunk requested,
so it might not be possible to decipher if the allocation is for an aligned or unaligned chunk.
====

[[rss-ebpf]]
==== bcc/eBPF

A version of
https://github.com/iovisor/bcc[bcc]/
https://ebpf.io/[eBPF]
that can do stack traces is only available from Linux kernel 4.8 onwards.
It can do in-kernel summaries,
which makes it more efficient and has lower overhead.
Unfortunately it doesn't understand DWARF debug symbols,
so the information obtained might be harder to read and contain less detail.

bcc/eBPF is very extensible so it's easier to tailor make scripts to track specific metrics.
The `bcc` project contains a `stackcount` program that can be used to count stack traces in similar way to what `perf` did in the previous section.
But in some cases, it might be more useful to have other metrics other than number of calls to a system call.
`malloc` is one such example.
The number of `malloc` calls is not so important,
but rather the size of the allocations.
So rather than having a flamegraph showing sample counts,
a flamegraph can be generated that shows bytes allocated.

Aside from `mmap`,

> `malloc` system calls are also present in GraalVM native executables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`malloc` system calls are also present in native executables generated by GraalVM.
```

Let's put bcc/eBPF in action to generate a flamegraph of bytes allocated using `malloc`.

To do this,
first re-generate a Quarkus native executable removing debug info,
which bcc/eBPF does not understand,
and instead use frame pointer with local symbols to get the stack traces:

[source,bash]
----
$ mvn package -DskipTests -Dnative \
  -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=-H:-DeleteLocalSymbols,-H:+PreserveFramePointer
----

> https://github.com/galderz/BPF-tools/blob/topic.1202.fix-mallocstacks/old/2017-12-23/mallocstacks.py[mallocstacks.py]

Reviewer: Please upload the script in the guide's folder structure to avoid external links.

Author: Good idea. I don't want to embed it necessarily but definitely good idea having it there. I had to slightly tweak the original script from Brendan to work with more recent Python versions.

Author: Added script and pushed update.

...
[New Thread 0x7fffc6ffd6c0 (LWP 3359)]
__  ____  __  _____   ___  __ ____  ______
 --/ __ \/ / / / _ | / _ \/ //_/ / / / __/
 -/ /_/ / /_/ / __ |/ , _/ ,< / /_/ /\ \
--\___\_\____/_/ |_/_/|_/_/|_|\____/___/
2023-02-09 18:02:32,794 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) code-with-quarkus 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT native (powered by Quarkus 2.16.1.Final) started in 0.011s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
2023-02-09 18:02:32,794 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Profile prod activated.
2023-02-09 18:02:32,794 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Installed features: [cdi, resteasy-reactive, smallrye-context-propagation, vertx]
----

Once the startup has complete,
press `Ctrl-C` on the `stackcount` shell.

Then process the stacks file as a flamegraph.
Note that the stacks generated by this script are already collapsed,
so the flamegraph can be generated just like this:

[source,bash]
----
$ cat out.stacks | ${FG_HOME}/flamegraph.pl --color=mem --title="malloc bytes Flame Graph" --countname="bytes" > out.svg
----

The flamegraph produced should look something like this:

image::malloc-bytes.svg[malloc bytes flamegraph]

This shows that most of the memory requested using `malloc` comes from epoll in Java NIO,

> but the overall amount allocated via `malloc` is barely 268KB.

Reviewer: How do we know that it is barely 268KB?

Author: It's in the svg file. If you look at the very bottom line it'll tell you how much memory is allocated using `malloc` for all its calls:

![Screenshot 2023-02-13 at 11 50 41](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/50187/218438609-6d9db0d4-a4af-4ee2-8f6c-f297c7ecb809.png)

Anything wrong with that? You can inspect the svg by opening the file in a different tab.

Reviewer: No, nothing wrong with this. It's just not clear in the text where this comes from. I would add a hint :)

Author: I've just updated the explanation with a hint.

  -XX:±VerboseGC                               Print more information about the heap before and after each collection. Default: - (disabled).
----

[[rss]]
=== Resident Set Size (RSS)

As described in the
xref:performance-measure.adoc[Measuring Performance guide],
the footprint of Quarkus applications is measured using the resident set size (RSS).
This is also applicable to native applications,

> but the runtime engine that manages the footprint is GraalVM's SubstrateVM rather than the JVM.

Author: I guess just say `GraalVM`?

> but the runtime engine that manages the footprint is GraalVM's SubstrateVM rather than the JVM.

Reviewer: What do you think about something like this?

```suggestion
but the runtime engine that manages the footprint in this case is built in the native executable itself rather than the JVM.
```

The reporting techniques specified in the
xref:performance-measure.adoc[Measuring Performance guide]
are applicable to native applications too,

> but what causes the RSS to be higher or lower is specific to how GraalVM's `native-image` works.

Reviewer: If you decide to use https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31061/files#r1106734381 this might also fit better here:

```suggestion
but what causes the RSS to be higher or lower is specific to how the generated native executables work.
```

In the context of GraalVM,
DWARF stack traces contain more detail and are easier to understand than those generated with frame pointers.
As first step, build a Quarkus native executable with debug info enabled and a couple of extra flags.
One flag to disable optimizations,
and another to avoid inlined methods being omitted from the stack traces.
These two flags have been added to obtain stack traces that contain as much information as possible.

[source,bash]
----
$ mvn package -DskipTests -Dnative \
  -Dquarkus.native.debug.enabled \
  -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=-O0,-H:-OmitInlinedMethodDebugLineInfo
----

[WARNING]
====
Disabling optimizations makes it easier to learn how to use `perf`
and get as detailed stack traces as possible,
because it shows more info about what gets called where.
However, doing so might lead to more allocations happening which would not happen if optimizations would have been applied.
In other words, passing in `-O0` will change the allocation pattens for many applications,
because it disables optimizations such as escape analysis or dead code elimination.

> A real assessment of the allocations an application deployed in production makes requires running with default optimizations (`-O2`),

Author: Sounds good. I'll apply this myself and fix the spelling mistake.

> A real assessment of the allocations an application deployed in production makes requires running with default optimizations (`-O2`),

Author: I've pushed a commit to rephrase it, see what you think.

> A real assessment of the allocations an application deployed in production makes requires running with default optimizations (`-O2`),

Reviewer: Looks good to me :+1:
